---
title: Inverse problems in cardiac motion estimation,
author: Hari Sundar and George Biros
location: 3rd European Conference on Computational Optimization, Chemnitz, Germany
link: http://www.tu-chemnitz.de/mathematik/eucco/
layout: talk
tags: [parallel, imaging]
---
We propose a method for the analysis of cardiac images with the goal of 
reconstructing the motion of the ventricular walls. The main feature of our method is that the inversion
parameter field is the active contraction of the myocardial fibers. This is
accomplished with a biophysically-constrained, four-dimensional (space plus time)
formulation that aims to complement information that can be gathered from the
images by _a priori_ knowledge of cardiac mechanics.
_Our main hypothesis is that by incorporating biophysical information, we can
generate more informative priors and thus, more accurate predictions of the
ventricular wall motion_. We outline the formulation, discuss
the computational methodology for solving the inverse motion estimation, and
present preliminary validation using synthetic and tagged MR images. 
We integrate an in-house spatially non-uniform octree meshing scheme with an adjoint-based inversion solver. 
The overall method uses patient-specific imaging and fiber information to reconstruct the motion.  In these preliminary
tests, we verify the implementation and conduct a parametric study to test the
sensitivity of the model to material properties perturbations, model errors,
and incomplete and noisy observations. 