---
title: HykSort&#58; a new variant of hypercube quicksort on distributed memory architectures
author: Hari Sundar, Dhairya Malhotra, George Biros
location: 27th International Conference on Supercomputing, Eugene, OR
link: http://www.ics-conference.org/
layout: talk
tags: [parallel, sorting]
---

In this paper, we present `HykSort`, an optimized comparison sort for
distributed memory architectures that attains more than $2\times$
improvement over bitonic sort and samplesort.  The algorithm is based
on the hypercube quicksort, but instead of a binary recursion, we
perform a $k$-way recursion in which the pivots are selected
accurately with an iterative parallel select algorithm. The
single-node sort is performed using a vectorized and multithreaded
merge sort. The advantages of `HykSort` are lower communication costs,
better load balancing, and avoidance of $\mathcal{O}(p)$-collective
communication primitives. We also present a staged-communication
samplesort, which is more robust than the original samplesort for
large core counts.  We conduct an experimental study in which we
compare hypercube sort, bitonic sort, the original samplesort, the
staged samplesort, and `HykSort`. We report weak and strong scaling
results and study the effect of the grain size. It turns out that no
single algorithm performs best and a hybridization strategy is
necessary.  As a highlight of our study, on our largest experiment on
262,144 AMD cores of the CRAY XK7  *Titan* platform at the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory we sorted 8 trillion 32-bit integer keys in
37 seconds achieving 0.9TB/s effective throughput.

[**Slides**](/~hari/files/pres/ics13.pdf)   
[**Paper**](/~hari/files/pubs/ics13.pdf)   
[**Code**](/~hari/files/code/hykSort-1.0.tgz) 
