---
title: Geometric Multigrid for high-order discretizations
author: Hari Sundar, Georg Stadler, Omar Ghattas and George Biros
location: 16th Copper Mountain Conference on Multigrid Methods
link: http://grandmaster.colorado.edu/~copper/2013/
layout: talk
tags: [multigrid, parallel]
---

We are interested on asymptotically optimal---$\mathcal{O}(N)$---complexity solvers for approximating the solution of elliptic partial differential equations (PDEs), where $N$ is the number of unknowns.  Multigrid is such a solver. In practice however, multigrid performs best for low-order uniform discretizations with smooth coefficients. 

Our goal is to develop a parallel geometric multigrid for solving 
systems arising from higher-order discretizations of
variable-coefficient elliptic partial differential equations on
arbitrary geometries using highly adapted meshes.
High-order discretizations offer several advantages.  According to
standard isoparametric polynomial approximation theory,
the approximation error in the $L_2$-norm is bounded by,
\[
 \|u-u_h\|_{L_2} \le Ch^{p+1}\|u\|_{H^{p+1}(\Omega)},
\]   
where $\|\cdot\|_{H^p}$ is the standard $H^p$ Sobolev norm, $\|\cdot\|_{L_2}$ is the $L_2$-norm, $u$ is the exact solution of the PDE, and $u_h$ is the solution of the $h$-discrete problem. Therefore, 
by using a finite element basis of at least degree $p$, we can achieve
very fast $\mathcal{O}(N^{-(p+1)})$ convergence for sufficiently
smooth problems while improving the locality and thus the CPU
efficiency of the calculations.

 Our method is designed for meshes that are built from an unstructured
hexahedral macro mesh, in which each macro element is adaptively
refined as an octree. This forest-of-octrees approach enables us to
generate meshes for complex geometries with arbitrary levels of local
refinement. We use geometric multigrid (GMG) for each of the octrees
and algebraic multigrid (AMG) as the coarse grid solver. We designed
our GMG sweeps to entirely avoid collectives, thus minimizing
communication cost. Recently, we presented weak and strong scaling
results for the 3D variable-coefficient Poisson problem using linear
discretization that demonstrate high parallel scalability. Here we
explore various approaches for extending our geometric multigrid
solver to support higher-order discretizations.

For higher-order finite-element discretizations, the following approaches are commonly used, 

* Schwarz-based methods
* $p$-multigrid 
* precondition using lower-order operator
* direct: $h$-multigrid on the higher order discretizations 

In summary, the overall theme of existing work appears to use
low-order approximations as preconditioners.  The advantages of doing
this are mainly in the simplicity of the approach and the availability
of parallel multigrid solvers capable of solving such lower-order
operators. The sparsity of the lower-order operators also permits the
use of AMG for solving the lower-order operators, possibly obtained
via discretizations on unstructured meshes.  Although there are
examples of using Algebraic Multigrid directly on operators resulting
from higher-order discretizations, limited work has been done on using
geometric multigrid with higher-order discretizations. To the best of
our knowledge, no prior work on using geometric multigrid for solving
systems arising from higher-order discretizations on arbitrary
geometries using highly adapted meshes.  In this work, we develop
geometric multigrid methods to support higher-order discretizations
($1\le p\le 8$) and compare compare against preconditioning using the
co-located linear operator. We evaluate using variable-coefficient
Poisson problems on $2D$ and $3D$ domains. We demonstrate that by
using appropriate inter-grid transfer operators and smoothers,
mesh-independent convergence is possible ($1\le p\le8$) for the
_direct_ approach. For the direct approach, best results are obtained
using the symmetric successive overrelaxation (SSOR) smoother. We
conclude with thoughts on the parallelization of the proposed
approach.

[**Slides**](/~hari/files/pres/sundar_copper13_homg.pdf)
 
